Once around Janus and Epimetheus.
These are moons of Saturn. The first
discovery is officially the 15th of
December 1966 by Dulus, French
astronomer. And there was a precovery
photograph from earlier that year on the
29th of October uh by another astronomer
that p had managed to pick up the same
object.
At the time Saturn's rings were edge on
to us and the image on the right is
generated from a planetarium with the
date set to the 15th of December 1966.
And you can hardly see the rings at all.
You can see marked some of the moons
including uh the ones that we're talking
about Janus and lurking behind the body
of the planet there Epimetheus along
with two others Mmus that had been known
for many years and a smaller one
Prometheus.
So the fact that the rings were so
completely edge on to us was the reason
that the discovery of Janus was made
because it orbits just at the edge of
the rings. It was almost invisible when
the rings were tilted
in our direction. But as they are so
thin and vanish when we cross the ring
plane periodically as Saturn and Earth
orbit round in slightly different
orbital planes around the sun the angle
of Saturn's equator and its rings to us
changes and just as I record this video
they are edge on to us again. I was
looking the other night and you just
couldn't see them at all. And it's that
that enabled observers to actually spot
Janus for the first time. It's very very
close to the outer edge of the A ring.
Sir Patrick Moore in his book, The
Amateur Astronomer from the 1960s and
70s, which I've still got on the shelf
here, and he refers to it on page 131,
saying that he'd actually observed Janus
on at least four different occasions
during 1966,
but failed to recognize that it was an
unknown moon. So, he might have actually
been able to claim that as a discovery
if he'd reported it. And there is the
man in an old photograph with his uh
15-in reflector in his dome at uh his
home Farings in West Street in Selzy
on the south coast of the UK.
Now, three days later, on the 18th of
December of that same year, 1966,
Richard Walker was observing, and he saw
a moon in a very similar ringed edge
position and recorded it.
Realizing that it wasn't any of the
known moons, he reported it and
the position was different. It just
didn't seem to add up. We seem to have
got Janus having been discovered on the
15th and then 3 days later another moon
in a different position but at the same
relative distance from Saturn.
And as observers were then encouraged to
go and confirm these observations,
making more and more reports, the orbit
just did not seem to make any sense. It
seemed to be flitting about from one
observation to another in a rather
irregular manner.
And this led to a name being coined for
the moon, Janus, named after the
two-faced Roman god, because of this
very, very curious behavior where it
kept appearing in the wrong place.
And it wasn't until 12 years later,
1978, that Larsson and Fountain solved
the problem. They realized that the
observations during 19667
were in fact of two different objects
and could be grouped into two uh parts,
each associated with a different moon,
but in very similar orbits.
And the names Janus and Epimetheus were
coined for these two moons, these
co-orbital moons that were in almost
identical path around Saturn.
The following year, 1st of September
1979, we had the Saturn flyby of Pioneer
11 and some images were taken which
seemed to possibly reveal a new moon. S
for Saturn, 1979 for the year,
and one and S for sat satellite.
And this was probably Epimetheus.
And then Pioneer 11's particle detectors
picked up a shadow which they thought
was another moon, giving it the
designation S1979
S2. And we think that was Janus. So,
it's probable that Pioneer 11 managed to
spot both of them.
In 1980, Voyager 1 made a flyby, just a
year behind Pioneer 11, and this time it
was on the lookout, and it managed to
confirm this double moon existence of
Janus and Epimetheus during the flyby.
didn't get a particularly close uh look
at either of them. It had to take a path
uh uh such that it would be able to get
a good flyby of Titan. And that meant
that it really sort of flew past and
underneath Saturn and up out of the
solar system um and not able to then
carry on on its way to the outer
planets. But uh Titan was such an object
of interest that it was deemed that to
be the right choice. And of course it
was being followed not far behind by
Voyager 2 which was able to get this
rather blurry image of Janus from a
distance showing a potato shaped moon
covered in craters which wasn't really
too much of a surprise.
Since Voyager 2, we have of course had
the Cassini mission and this has been
able to image things in much greater uh
resolution with much better cameras. And
this is Janus apparently floating
against the background of Saturn itself
with Saturn's atmosphere in the
background there showing that nearly
round shape, a little bit elliptical and
with chunks taken out of it and craters.
So physically it's 203x
185x
149 km. So ellipsoidal in both axes and
weighs in at just under 2 * 10 18 kg
which is uh not very much. The earth is
10 the 25 kg for comparison. So this is
a fairly small moon really. And density
is less than that of ice 0.64 64 g per
cubic cm suggesting it's a rubble pile
with many voids in it made mostly of icy
material but with a lot of gaps
somewhat cratered and very shiny
looking. It reflects over 70% of the
light. Uh our moon by comparison is
about 12% so very dark indeed. So this
is much brighter for its size than uh
you would perhaps expect. And that goes
with the probability that this is a
fairly young surface because bright ice
tends to get degraded by solar radiation
and turn from a nice crystalline form
into an amorphous form which then
doesn't scatter the light back anywhere
near as well.
Epimetheus named after the son of
Epapotus. Of course, the Appetus is
another of Saturn's large moons, brother
to Prometheus and Atlas. Those are also
names of Saturn's moons. Um, and it
means hindsight from the original Greek.
Smaller than Janus. So, it's uh long
axis is about the same as Janus's short
axis. Um, and again, irregular and
somewhat jagged looking and about a
quarter of the mass in total. And again
covered in grooves, valleys, craters and
so forth. Uh so fairly battered looking
but again quite bright in color. Uh
looking to be similar in age to Janus.
Now Janus's orbit on average is just 50
kilometers greater in its uh semi- major
axis than that of Epimetheus. And 50
kilometers is less than the size of the
short axis of either of the moons. And
so you would think that there would be a
possibility that these might crash into
each other because the orbits really are
very similar indeed.
But smaller orbits take less time. And
so Epimetheus, left to its own devices,
would manage an a lap of Saturn in just
30 seconds less per orbit than Janus.
And an object on a close path,
an inner orbit, will take less time to
go round than one in a further orbit.
Um, but these two manage to stay apart.
They don't crash into each other because
they undergo orbital swapping.
I have a diagram here showing Epimetheus
on a lower orbit, shorter path around
Saturn. And as such, taking less time,
it will gradually approach from behind
and catch up with Janus. Janus with a J
slightly larger in size and mass.
Epimetheus approaches it. And as it does
so, the gravity of the two moons is
pulling on each other and it's
accelerating Epimetheus towards Janus
and accelerating Janus backwards towards
Epimetheus. So Epimetheus speeds up and
when you speed up you end up moving into
a higher orbit. A curious quirk of
orbital dynamics. Um, obviously a rocket
firing its engines will eventually
escape if it's got enough power going to
higher and higher orbit as it speeds up
until it finally flies away. So if you
accelerate Epimetheus, it climbs away
from Saturn.
In the process, of course, Janus,
every action having an equal and
opposite reaction is slowed and slowing
down makes you spiral inwards. So it
falls to a lower orbit and so they swap
positions. Epimetheus ends up in the
outer track and Janus on the lower
track.
Now that they're that way round,
Janus's orbit is shorter and therefore
it gets to pull away from Epimetheus and
the two separate again
until gradually Janus goes right around
and catches up with Epimetheus and the
process reverses. The outer moon is
slowed, the inner moon is sped up and
climbs away from the planet. and they
swap back. And so we've got this little
animation here of the two of them in
these strange orbits. Epimetheus comes
around, approaches Janus, they swap,
goes back around the other way, and they
approach in the opposite sense and swap
again. And so they seem to bounce
backwards and forwards off each other.
Now this animation is from the point of
view of somebody uh rotating around with
the average velocity. Um so you wouldn't
get this view from Earth, but you would
get this view if you were uh in the
vicinity of Saturn doing an orbit in
their typical average time. Uh so it can
be quite confusing. Here's another way
of looking at it again from a rotating
frame of reference. Each of the two has
these horseshoe orbits which uh are sort
of these long curved sausage tracks.
And you can see that Janus being more
massive is affected less by the process.
It's uh orbit is typically 21.6 six
degrees per hour going around Saturn if
you want to think of it in those terms.
Um, and it's slowed down very slightly
and sped up very slightly by those
figures of 0.05 0.5 a day or uh plus or
minus whereas the lower mass of
Epimetheus means that it orbit is
changed more radically uh by a figure of
0.19 plus and minus compared to the
standard and so you get these two
racetrack patterns that the uh
moons appear to observe. Now
this was figured all figured out by um
Lagrange when he was working out his uh
lagrange points the stable regions in
the threebody problem and he was able to
figure out that you could follow a path
creating a horseshoe shaped orbit
as you tracked around the larger of the
bodies in a a threebody system and we
see that in the asteroid Kruifithnany
which orbits around the sun in exactly
one year and the orbit of the two bodies
crewne and earth is shown in the top
animation there with the sun in the
middle's
orbit is more elliptical and offset in a
different direction and so its orbit
goes around the sun with close
approaches to the earth on a regular
basis. But if you look at it from our
perspective in the bottom diagram,
holding the Earth still, then the path
of Cruithney seems to be that yellow
kidney bean racetrack shape um where it
approaches and moves away from the
Earth. And some people have described
this as Earth's second moon, but really
it's not. It's orbiting the sun and it's
being affected by the presence of the
earth, but it's not really under the
control of the earth's gravity at all.
And this process probably occurred with
a body called Thea in the early days of
the solar system. A Mars sized planet
formed near one of the Lrangee points of
the Earth's orbit and then that resulted
in it wandering back and forth in these
horseshoe loops perturbed by the
changing gravity of Jupiter. As Jupiter
spiraled in, it gradually got into um
wider and wider loops until it finally
collided with the Earth, smashed into
and merged with it. And a lot of the
ejector from the impact then coalesed to
form our moon orbiting around the
combined body of the proto Earth and
Thea.
And as regards Jeep, Janus and
Epimetheus, it's possible that they were
formed by the breakup of a larger moon.
These rubble pile objects are not very
well held together by uh fact that they
have very very weak gravity. And so
coming close to a giant planet like
Saturn, they can be torn apart. That's
how the rings formed. And these are just
outside the edge of the A- ring. and
therefore could well be that the remains
of a larger moon uh that were torn to
pieces. But they are destined perhaps
under the pertubation of the other moons
eventually to approach each other more
closely. They actually at the moment
only get within uh a minimum of 10,000
kilometers of each other before that
orbital swap occurs. So they're not
going to hit each other at the moment.
But at some point in the future, the
orbits may get altered to uh the point
where a another collision might happen
in which case a whole lot of debris will
be added to Saturn's rings in all
probability.
Now there is a faint dust ring
co-orbital with Janus and Epimetheus
when we think this is caused by meteor
strikes on the surface. other small
space rocks hitting either Janus or
Epimetheus and ejecting more material
into this faint ring that's associated
with them. And their position just
outside the A- ring
makes them shepherd moons corelling the
outer edge of the A- ring to not grow
any further. Otherwise, material would
start to get perturbed by the gravity of
these two, giving it a kick. A couple of
lovely photographs here of Janus
very close to Saturn's rings and a
little bit further away with the moon
Teis, the much larger moon of Saturn,
also visible in the right hand image
there.
So, thanks very much for listening. That
was Janus and Epimetheus, the co-orbital
moons of Saturn. Thanks for listening.